#labels Featured,Phase-Design
= Taxoner =

== Description ==

*Taxoner* is a C program that identifies taxonomy, primarily bacteria by mapping NGS reads against a comprehensive sequence database such as [ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/blast/db/FASTA/nt.gz nt] database of [https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov NCBI] or its predefined subsets. 

In the preprocessing phase, the database is divided into partitions and indexed with the bowtie2 package. Alignment is carried out with bowtie2 and the taxonomies are identified with a lowest common ancestor search algorithm.  

The standard output of *Taxoner* are:

  * A summary of the found taxonomies.
  * Alignments in the SAMtools format.

The characteristic feature of *Taxoner* is that it can run on average desktop computers. 

*Taxoner* can be used in multiple ways, such as:

  # A standalone taxonomy classification program.
  # An aligner paired with a taxon classifier.
  # In combination with other aligners and taxon detection programs. 

For instance, a program like [http://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/metaphlan Metaphlan] can be used as a fast estimator of the bacterial community, and *Taxoner* can be used then to identify the underlying strains and other, non-bacterial organisms.

== Command line program ==

The *Taxoner* source code is located in <i>src/taxoner/</i> folder. The executable is located in the <i>bin/</i> folder.

The *Taxoner* options are:

{{{
Taxoner version 2.0
        Align NGS reads to large databases like NCBI nr/nt/complete genomes...

        Please index database with other program first

Usage: ./taxoner -dbPath <folder_path> -taxpath <taxonomy _file> -seq <NGS_reads>

Options:
-------

        -seq            Input reads (fastq format, single-end) to align against database

        -dbPath         Path to bowtie2 indexes of database
                        If -dbNames not specified, then reads will be aligned to all indexes in folder

        -o              Output folder name

        -taxpath        Nodes.dmp file from NCBI database


Optionals:

        -host           Align reads against host, and remove host reads

        -p              Number of threads used for analysis
        
        -dbNames        Names of index files to which reads will be aligned 

        -no-host-filter Do not filter host

        -bt2-maxhits    Max hits searched for each read during alignment (def: 10)

        -bt2-allhits    Get all valid alignments with bowtie2

        -only-neighbor  Do not realign, redo nearest neighbor search for 
                        alignment files in the specified output folder

        -neighbor-score Alignment score at which reads are reduced to 
                        nearest neighbor. Value has to be between 0.001 - 1.
                        Default: 0.99


}}}
